I'm Peter Edberg.
I've been working at Apple for
about 18 years on various aspects of
system software internationalization.
I'll be doing the first
third of the talk today,
but before that,
I'd like to give you an overview
of the whole presentation.
I'm going to begin with some
background information on the
motivation for what we're doing
in Leopard and some background
information on the organization of
the text input system as a whole.
Then on my portion of the talk,
I'm going to focus on the
Text Input Sources API.
This is a new API for Leopard that
allows you to find out information
about text input sources,
to get notifications of
changes to text input sources,
and to be able to
programmatically manipulate them.
Then Michael Grady is going to talk
about some improvements to TSM and how
TSM is adapting to changes in Leopard.
Finally,
Lee Collins is going to talk about it.
Lee Collins is going to talk about
the new input method kit framework
for creation of input methods,
which finally allows you to create
input methods that are applications
instead of component manager components.
Throughout,
we're going to try and show you how
the changes we're making are going
to enable you to better address
user expectations and needs in your
applications and also hopefully make
it simpler for you to write code.
Simply,
making code simpler is not necessarily
consistent with making changes because
you'll have multiple platform targets.
There has to be a good
reason for making changes,
and we think we have a few.
First, of course,
we've got some leopard-wide initiatives.
The 64-bit ABI, the new binary interface,
has no backward
compatibility requirement.
Deprecated interfaces are not being
carried forward to this new API or ABI,
so it allows us the opportunity
for some modernization,
the opportunity to introduce
new API that replace some of
the deprecated functionality.
Also, resolution independence affects
the content of events that
refer to screen position,
and of course,
there are a number of these
events associated with TSM.
The second big reason has to do with
a number of modernizations that we're
making for the Text Input system.
First, and you'll hear this
throughout the presentation,
the Script Manager is really,
really deprecated,
as are all of the types
associated with it,
script code, language code, region code,
and so on.
We've got modern replacements for all
those that are better in many respects.
So we're removing the Script Manager from
the main parts of the control flow
in Text Input and focusing on a
Unicode-clean Text Input path.
The Script Manager will still
exist in 32-bit ABI as a kind of
compatibility adjunct to the main path.
Second, we do have to enable new
types of input methods,
as I mentioned,
and we have to have tokens that refer to
not just component-based input methods,
but a wider range of input methods,
so we need a more abstract
token type for these.
Third, we have to enable new
types of input methods,
as I mentioned,
and we need a more abstract
token type for these.
We're also trying to do a lot
of performance improvements
and memory reductions,
especially for App Launch and App Switch.
And finally,
the third big reason for changes
is to respond to requests that
a number of you have made.
So let's dive into the
Leopard Text Input system.
There are two new pieces for Leopard,
the highlighted ones here.
And along with these two,
there are several other areas that we're
going to be focusing on in the talk.
Now, there's always been some capability
for management of text input sources.
It's been spread through
the Script Manager and TSM,
and a lot of it depended on
the now-deprecated tokens,
the script code,
even component ID as a way
to refer to input methods.
It's not necessarily deprecated,
but it's not general enough.
So anyway,
we're extracting that functionality,
expanding it, and modernizing it for
Leopard as a separate module.
This allows TSM to
focus on its core tasks,
which include management of input
context state through the TSM document,
handling text input from
a variety of input sources
using a variety of protocols,
and mediating input source
access to application documents.
And this is important if you went
to the latent semantic analysis.
So, for example,
we're going to use the TSM-TMS session
for things like that to enable
input methods to do a better job.
Now there are some dark brown
or kind of reddish brown
boxes over there on the right.
Those represent input sources,
some of which come from Apple and
some of which come from some of you.
And this brings me to the
second new piece for Leopard,
which is the Input Method Kit.
Now there are some dark brown
or kind of reddish brown
boxes over there on the right.
Those represent input sources,
some of which come from Apple and
some of which come from some of you.
And this brings me to the
second new piece for Leopard,
which is the Input Method Kit.
There are a few other
boxes on this diagram.
I'm not going to really
focus on them today,
but for example,
the NS Text Field box is meant to
indicate that AppKit will handle a lot
of the text input system interaction
on your behalf if you're a Cocoa app.
The Text Input menu is an important
user interface element for text input,
but there's no programmatic
interface for applications.
And of course,
the reason that all these pieces are
there is to make applications work.
So the gray box in the diagram is
meant to represent an application
that does interact heavily
with the text input system,
which presumably some of you are writing.
Now, one thing that some of these
applications do is do a lot of key
translation on their own and handle
key layout data on their own,
and that brings me to an
important point for Leopard.
We're converting all of the
Apple-supplied keyboard layouts
to use the Unicode format,
the U-char format.
This is part of our Unicode
clean text input path,
and it has several implications.
First,
for those of you who are developing
and providing keyboard layouts,
you should know that this is the
preferred format for keyboard layouts.
Also, if you're a developer who does
access key layout data directly,
you should not assume that data is
available in the old K-chart format,
which depended on Mac encodings and
is associated with the Script Manager.
And in fact,
that's been true for many releases.
It's been true for a long time
that many keyboard layouts did
not have K-chart data available,
but there are still applications
that depend on this.
Experimentally,
in an earlier release of Leopard,
we tried making all K-chart
data unavailable through
the key layout access APIs,
and that did break a few applications.
We filed bugs, so you know who you are,
hopefully.
But anyway, we may do that again.
So you should not depend on having
that K-chart data available.
Now, it is still the case that,
as a kind of a hedge,
getResource for K-chart data
will work as it did in Tiger.
And this is part of the
Script Manager backward compatibility.
The Script Manager uses that
way to get keyboard layout data,
but the rest of the system does not.
So the keyboard layout access API do not,
and the new input sources API do not get
access to keyboard layout data that way.
And you should not either.
Okay, so who are the people who might be
interested in the Text Input Sources API?
Well, any developer who wants to do
direct processing of text input,
any developer who wants to have
some control over text input
and may have been using some of
the Script Manager functionality
to do that in the past,
developers who need
information about text input,
and there are facilities
in the new TIS API also for
developers of input methods.
So it affects a large number of clients.
And why are we doing this?
Well,
I touched on a little bit of this before,
but let me say a little more detail now.
We've had a number of developer
requests for things like notification
of changes to input sources,
such as changes to selection or changes
to the set of enabled input sources,
the capability for
background manipulation.
If you're an app that wants to
sit in the background processing
text input in some way,
but having some control over the
input source used by the front app,
that's a capability
that's been requested.
And the ability to have more
information about input sources,
such as what's an input source that's
appropriate for a given language.
Also, as I mentioned,
we do need this new unified notion
of input source that can abstract
away the particular architecture
of the input method used,
for example, and several other issues,
and the TIS Input
Source API provides that.
Finally,
this is another step in moving away
from the Script Manager and moving away
from the script codes and other types
associated with the Script Manager.
It provides some similar functionality,
but using new, more modern types.
And again,
our primary path is for Unicode text.
There are a couple of important
concepts you need to know or understand
associated with text input sources.
First of all, there are three categories.
There are keyboard input sources,
which include keyboard layouts,
such as Swedish.
There are input methods, such as Kotori.
And there are input modes,
which are particular ways of inputting
text associated with an input method.
So for example, Kotori has Hiragana,
Katakana, Romaji,
several other input modes associated
with the parent input method,
Kotori.
There are some input methods that
are modeless and have only an input
method with no associated modes.
A second category is
palette input sources,
such as the character palette,
keyboard viewer, and so on.
And a third category is ink.
And these all behave in
slightly different ways,
and I'll get to that in a second.
Some input sources are invisible
to the system user interface.
These include things like
private keyboard layouts that
are used by an input method,
and even private input modes.
Some input sources are visible,
but not selectable.
So parent input methods that have
modes are typically not selectable
in things like the text input menu.
They are visible, however,
in the international press panel.
For example, you can enable or disable
all the modes associated with
an input method as a group.
Now, in most cases,
input sources are enabled and disabled
using international preferences,
although Inc.
has its own preferences panel for that.
As I mentioned, there's some different
behavior associated with the
three different categories.
At any moment,
there's exactly one keyboard
input source selected.
It may be an input method.
It may be a keyboard layout.
You can have zero or more
palette input sources selected.
So you can have keyboard viewer and
character palette up at the same time,
or none of them.
And for ink,
you can only have one ink input source,
and it can either be
enabled and selected or not.
Okay, so enough of the background.
This is the core token associated
with the Text Input Source API,
a TIS input source ref.
This is a CF-type ref,
and so it can be passed to all the
normal polymorphic CF-based functions,
and be put in collections and so on.
This is our abstract representation
of any type of input source.
It's the modern token.
Having one of these,
you can get a number of
properties associated with it.
We have a function
TIS_GET_INPUT_SOURCE_PROPERTY.
You pass your input source ref and the
key for the property that you want to
examine and get back a void star value.
Typically, this value will be a CF type,
but not always.
In some cases,
we return an icon ref or something else.
These properties generally
fall into several categories.
They're ones that help you
identify the input source,
such as our new input source ID,
and more on that in a moment.
You can find out the category
or type of input source,
the bundle ID.
If it's a mode,
you can find out the mode ID.
Now, more about the input source ID.
This is a new property,
a universal string that's
going to uniquely identify
input sources in Leopard.
We are going to provide a plist key
that will enable you to specify these.
Absent that, we have a way of
automatically constructing it,
but we do want to make
that plist key available.
That's something that's
not in your seed version,
but we will publicize
that shortly afterward.
There are other kinds of properties,
like input source ID,
which is a new property,
a universal string that's
going to uniquely identify
input sources in Leopard.
We are going to provide a plist key
that will enable you to specify these.
Absent that, we have a way of
automatically constructing it,
but we do want to make
that plist key available.
That's something that's
not in your seed version,
but we will publicize
that shortly afterward.
There are other kinds of properties,
like is it ASCII capable?
Is it capable of entering ASCII?
Is it selectable?
The name?
What are the languages it can support?
Icon, etc.
Key layout data, in this case,
is only going to be Unicode
format key layout data.
One property that's not on this list and
is not in the seed but we realize we will
have to make available is visibility,
whether it's an invisible
or visible input source.
And finally, dynamic state:
isn't currently enabled,
isn't currently selected.
Okay, well, how do you create these
input source refs?
There's one primitive function,
TISCreateInputSourceList,
and this takes a filter CFDictionary of
keys and corresponding values and
returns an array of input source
refs that match that specified
set of property keys and values.
By default,
this will just return information
for enabled input sources.
However, there's a Boolean parameter
to this function that lets
you find out information about
all installed input sources.
In some cases,
the CFArray will just have one element.
If you pass a property key
for a particular bundle ID,
say, or input source ID,
you can narrow it down to a
single input source and get
the input source ref that way.
There are some primitive
functions that build on this.
You can get the current
keyboard input source,
as you see,
the ASCII-capable keyboard input source,
and various other things.
Input source appropriate
for a particular language.
Here's an example of
how you would use this.
And you've seen this kind of thing
in other talks today and the day
before about using CFDictionary's to
create matching dictionaries of
properties and values and using that
information to obtain something.
In this case,
it's going to be an input source ref.
So basically, the key elements are the
CFDictionary create with
your keys and values and the
TIS create input source list.
And I show all the
releases here and so on.
Much simpler is if you just want
to get an input source that's
appropriate for a particular language.
Say check in this case,
you just pass the language code for
that to TIS copy input source for
language and get an input source ref.
Now note here, we're not using the
Script Manager language code
or region code or anything.
We're using, actually what this is,
is an RFC 3066 BIS language code,
but this is the type of string that's
used in CFLocale and ICU and elsewhere.
It's the modern way that we
indicate languages in the system.
At its simplest form,
it might just consist of
an ISO 639 language code,
and in fact, that's what this is.
Now for manipulating them,
in most cases the API that's going to be
important to you is select input source.
So with a keyboard input source,
that will deselect the
previous keyboard input source,
not keyboard layout as it says there.
For other types of input sources,
it has no effect on what other
input sources may be selected.
Deselect input source is mainly useful
for palette or ink input sources.
And the enable or disable input
source API are mainly intended for
input methods that may want to bring
up their own palettes and so forth.
We also have a couple of notifications,
one for changing the selected keyboard
input source and one for changing the
set of enabled keyboard input sources.
Okay, well I'd like to go
through a quick demo here.
Okay, so I threw together a quick
Cocoa app here called TIS Demo
just to show you some of the kinds
of things you can do with this.
There are a couple of
little rough edges with it,
and it's not meant to
demonstrate a user interface.
Basically, selecting a row in the table
view here will give you
additional information below,
what its input source ID is, bundle ID,
input mode if it has one,
and some supported languages.
You can enable or disable
input sources using this.
You can also select them,
and that will be reflected
elsewhere in the UI.
So, for example, if I go down here and,
oh, let's see, let's pick something.
Let me select Hiragana
as my input source,
and you can see that the
Text Input menu changes it,
changes there.
The boxes at the bottom always
reflect the current keyboard
input source and the current
ASCII-capable keyboard input source,
so that you see right now we've
got Hiragana as our input source,
but the ASCII-capable input source
is still the US keyboard layout.
If I go through here and, for example,
I enable,
or I can enable it in here as well,
if I go through and enable French, say,
you'll see that French is
the current input source,
but it's also the current
ASCII-capable input source.
One fun little thing here that
shows background manipulation is to
cycle through enabled input sources,
so, and this is going to cycle
through them in the order that
the table view is in here,
so let me start this.
This is going to cycle
through every five seconds.
It's going to pick a new,
the next enabled input
source in the list here.
So let me start that,
and then I'm going to switch
over here to TextEdit,
so I'm typing in TextEdit.
I've got some Arabic in there,
and now we've got
What have we got here?
I guess that's... Oh,
now we're on to French,
so I've got the Azzurri keyboard here.
And now we're on to German,
so I've got the German keyboard,
but it's got still QW in the upper left,
and we're in Russian here, and so on.
Let me stop that.
Anyway, so that just gives you a
sense of the kinds of things
that you can do with that.
Okay, so back to slides, please.
Okay, well,
we're full of recommendations,
do's and don'ts,
so don't use the Script Manager,
don't assume that key layouts
have K-chart data available,
and don't assume that input
methods are components.
And one way you can avoid a lot of
these don'ts is by the first do,
which is adopt the Text Input Sources
API for manipulation of input sources.
Also, I've alluded to this,
is you can use more precise and more
modern tokens for representation
of a lot of the types you need.
And I've got a little cheat
sheet in the next slide that
goes into more detail on this.
And finally, and very important,
give us your feedback and suggestions.
It's not too late to have an
impact on the API for Leopard,
so please do give us your
feedback and suggestions,
things that you want to add,
or additional notifications,
whatever you'd like to see.
Okay, well,
here's the promised cheat sheet.
It shows you some of the ways that these
older tokens have been used in the past.
Script Code, especially,
has been used for many
different purposes.
And we'd like to have you replace
most of those usages with something
that's more appropriate for the way in
which you were using the script code.
So, CF Character Set,
where you meant the script code to
indicate a repertoire of characters.
CFString Encoding, or Text Encoding,
where you meant script code
to indicate a text encoding.
CFLocale, for language code,
or CFLocale Language String, sorry,
that's that language string
I was referring to earlier,
to refer to a language, etc.
And also the TIS Input Source Ref,
where you mean to refer to
other kinds of input sources,
Keyboard Layout Ref,
or the component where it was
used to indicate input methods.
Now, I'd like to bring up Michael Grady,
Mr.
TSM,
to give you some more detail on what's
happening with the Tech Services Manager.
Thank you, Peter,
for that consideration of the
new Text Input Sources API.
Hello, everybody.
My part of this symposium will be a
low-level consideration of changes to
the Text Services Manager in Leopard.
In particular, I'll be addressing two
types of developers.
Application developers who
provide your own text engine,
so most likely you're
programming to the Carbon API.
Certainly,
developers using Cocoa or HIToolbox's
HITextView are insulated from most of the
information except for part of the text.
I'll be presenting the first part
at the end of my presentation
that has to do with restricting
input sources and input context.
Another type of developer affected
by the information I'll be presenting
are input method developers.
The information will
be three general areas:
changes to TSM that affect
you in your deployment of your
applications to the 64-bit platform,
as well as your input methods.
Changes to TSM to support
resolution independence and how
they help you also support it
in your apps and input methods.
And finally,
modernization in TSM itself and how
that allows you to be more modern
and hopefully write more maintainable
code than you could in the past.
By far the biggest change to
TSM in Leopard has been the
large-scale deprecation of API.
API that expose deprecated
notions such as script code,
API that exposed underlying
types like the component ID,
which is really a plugin architecture
notion that has no business
being exposed at the API level.
All of these APIs mostly
fall in one group.
They're APIs that attempt
to control input sources,
manage input sources, enable them,
select them,
and they're not really part of
the core functionality of TSM,
which is input context management,
not input source management.
So it's logical that these all
have natural replacements in
the Text Input Sources API.
Of particular note is the
deprecation and death of key script.
Please attend this funeral.
It's mostly been used to select
an input source via a script code.
And so it has a natural
replacement in the TIS API.
There is one use of key script that
does not have a replacement in TIS.
And we'll be discussing that.
It has to do with
passing negative values,
non-script code values,
to it to restrict input sources
in a given input context,
like a text field.
We'll see the replacement for that later.
Another API that's been deprecated,
and when I mean deprecated here,
I mean not available on 64-bit
at all for all these APIs.
A further example is the
Keyboard Layout Access API,
also known as the KL API.
These APIs provided mostly iteration over
keyboard layouts and property queries.
These also all have natural
replacements in the TIS API.
I mentioned one more thing
here in the context of 64-bit,
and that is the TSM support
for an additional type of
input method architecture.
TSM still, even on 64-bit,
continues to support component
manager-based plugin input methods,
in addition to application-based
input methods developed to the Input
Method Kit framework that will be
discussed later by Lee Collins.
Why do I mention this in
conjunction with 64-bit?
Because it gives you,
the input method developer,
a choice on how to
deploy your input method.
If you're going to continue to be a
component manager-based input method,
you are a plugin.
As a plugin,
you are hosted in a parent process,
and if that process is 64-bit,
you need to be so as well.
Alternatively,
if you port your input method
to the Input Method Kit,
you are free from that requirement.
32-bit implementation is sufficient.
for you.
So all the deprecated
API are in techservices.h.
There are some more changes
in the Carbon events realm.
TSM defines two Carbon event
suites in the Carbon Event Manager.
Some of those events use
parameters whose event parameter
types are problematic on 64-bit.
One notable example is the use
of type long integer as the event
type for many different parameters.
It might not be obvious why that
type is problematic at first.
After all, on the LP64 data model,
a long is 64 bits.
The problem is that this event
parameter type is an alias to type SN32,
making it completely unsuitable
for things that need to be 64 bit.
For example, refcons.
Refcons are usually an object reference
of some sort or a pointer to data.
It needs to be 64 bits.
Byte counts and byte offsets are also
frequently used in TSM event parameters.
Those need to be 64 bits on LP64 as well.
So the Carbon Event Manager,
not just for TSM events,
but other events that
have similar problems,
have introduced three explicit
Carbon event parameter types,
type refcon, type byte count,
type byte offset.
Now, these event parameter types are new,
separate event parameter
types from type long integer.
They are source components,
and they are not necessarily the
same as the type long integer.
They are compatible between
32-bit and 64-bit implementations,
but there is a binary
compatibility issue.
If an input method, for example,
sets a parameter with
the type long integer,
and you, the application,
ask for a type refcon,
how does that work?
It's a different event parameter type.
The answer is that the
Carbon Event Manager provides
automatic type coercion for
these types on 32-bit only.
On 64-bit,
you are required to use the new
event parameter types in all cases.
Of course,
with these new event parameters,
you can't use the new
event parameter types.
You'll want to use the
corresponding data types,
such as those found in MacTypes.h.
The different variants of refcon,
byte offset, and byte count are also
defined in that header.
For the new parameter types,
you'll want to use the
corresponding data types,
such as those found in MacTypes.h.
The different variants of RefCon,
ByteOffset, and ByteCounter are also
defined in that header.
You'll also want to use the
point data in point space,
or also known as 72 dpi
virtual coordinate space.
The geometries for which you
might want data in screen pixel
coordinates are not limited to
things like rectangles or points.
There are things that are
unidimensional in nature,
like line height, line ascent,
that might make sense for you to ask
for in screen pixel coordinates as well.
So we have a new type
CG float screen pixel,
a variant of another new
event parameter type,
type CG float,
we'll be discussing in a bit.
So let's see how these new
types affect TSM events.
Some TSM events use some
deprecated event parameter types,
an example type QD point.
This has been replaced in all
cases by the type HI point.
And of course,
you're free to request that data
using the new screen pixel variants of
those event parameter types as well.
Some event parameter data in
TSM events are scalar values.
They've been typed in various ways.
We have an example here of a reply
point size parameter typed as type fix.
We have a line height in
one case typed as type SN16,
a font size as a type float.
Wouldn't it be nice if all of the things
that need to be floats were floats?
And so we have the type CG float used
in all cases for these parameters.
And where it makes sense,
such as line height,
line ascent information,
you can request those as type
CG float screen pixel as well.
And that coercion is all automatic.
TSM has undergone a lot
of internal modernization.
Upheaval is another
word for it on Leopard.
I mentioned already the support for
several input method architectures.
There's still full support,
even on 64-bit,
for component manager-based plugins,
also application-based input methods
implemented to the Input Method Kit.
TSM has completely moved off of
any notion of the Script Manager,
in particular,
any use of the Keyscript API.
It uses the TIS API that
Peter referred to.
This API is really the
way to go for you as well.
It can do things that you just simply
could not do with the old Keyscript API,
especially from background apps,
as Peter showed in the demo.
TSM has also modernized its event
parameter content with modern event
parameters with modern event types,
but still supporting the existing
event parameters in TSM events.
So how does this work?
How can you,
a client of a modern event parameter,
Get that data if the event parameter
data in the event are the older types.
This is not just a type coercion issue,
it's a parameter set
coercion issue of sorts.
So TSM is able to solve this
because you as input method
developers are really good citizens.
And you are using the
API we tell you to use,
you always do so, right?
While TSM is able to
leverage off of this,
consider what happens when
an input method dispatches
an event to an application.
It always calls an API called
SendTextInputEvent.
This is a perfect bottleneck
for TSM to inspect the event,
see what parameter data is there,
what parameter data it could promise.
and derive from the data that's present.
If the application then requests
the modern event parameter,
TSM will coerce them using a
promise mechanism on demand.
Similarly, when an event is returned to
TSM after being handled or not,
but before being returned
to the input method,
TSM can again inspect the event,
see what data is there,
and promise additional data.
Here are some examples of
the modern event parameter
types that TSM is introducing.
We have a typect fontref.
This refers to a Cortex font.
Some of you will have heard of this
in the Cortex session this morning.
An event parameter of this type
can encapsulate information
that was contained in various
parameters in the past.
We might have needed a font
parameter like an ATS fontref,
size, ascent, descent information.
All of this information can be
encapsulated in a single modern
event parameter of this new type.
We have an example of this
in the middle of the slide
in the offset to pause event.
It currently is introducing a replyct
fontref parameter that can encapsulate
the older parameters that contain font,
point size, etc.
There's a new typect glyph info ref that
replaces the ATS type glyph selector.
And a new typect attributed string ref.
And a parameter of this type can
encapsulate data formerly found in
different parameters that would contain
Unicode text separate from font,
separate from glyph info information.
An example of this is the text
input Unicode for key event.
This is a new send attributed string
parameter to replace the two or
three parameters needed previously.
A bit more on the modernization front.
Since TSM does support additional
input method architectures,
the type component instance event
parameter type is being eliminated.
In addition,
the type Intel writing code is really
a reference to a structure containing
a script code and a language.
In a Unicode world,
that's been deprecated.
Some of you application developers
who implement your own text engines,
you may have used an
API that's being deprecated,
TSM Set Inline Input Region.
This API was used to allow you
to communicate to TSM the bounds
on screen of an inline input
session as a user is typing.
That in turn allows TSM to filter
out mouse events that have no need
to be routed to an input method if
they don't intersect those bounds.
Well,
that's kind of an expensive way to do it.
TSM doesn't always need the information,
and that API required the
application to constantly update
the bounds in case TSM did need it.
Also had to make sure to call
the API in all the right places.
So it's being replaced
by a more convenient,
more interesting to you, we hope,
Carbon event, a text input event called
IsMouseEventInAnInputArea.
When TSM needs the information,
it will call your callback.
I have another plea for application
developers who provide your own
text engines to please implement
the TSM Document Access Protocol.
This is another TSM event suite that
essentially allows text services to
interact with any part of your document,
not just near the insertion point,
but anywhere.
Dictionary Services uses this
to provide definitions of
words that lie under the mouse,
no matter where the insertion point is.
The typography panel uses
the protocol as well.
It has been available
since MacOSX 10.3.
It's fully supported by Cocoa,
fully supported by
HIToolbox's HITextView.
Essentially, it is a set of events that
mimic the CFString API,
treating your document as if it were
one big CFString and accessing read-only
access anywhere in that string.
While the protocol does not implement
write access anywhere in a document,
it does define how this should be done.
There is an auxiliary event parameter in
the UpdateActiveInputArea event that's
used for inline input in general that
allows an input method or a text service
to specify a replaced range at arbitrary
locations in your document again,
independent of where
the insertion point is.
So what you need to do besides
implement the handlers in
the Document Access Protocol,
simply in any TSM event that you create,
indicate that you support this protocol
with the TSM document property,
support document access property.
This will allow TSM to notify input
methods that you do support that
and enable a richer set of features
for the users of your application.
The whole title of this session
is Take Charge of Text Input.
Developers have been asking for
quite a while for more control
in one area in particular,
and that is more flexibility in
restricting the set of input sources
for a given input context or text field.
For example,
developers often want to restrict the
set of input sources available to the
user for a text field to ASCII only.
Or once the application has
identified an input source
that really needs to be used,
it may want to prevent the user
from switching to something else,
again, in the context of that text field.
This has traditionally been done with
the KeyScript API with negative values,
non-script code values passed to it.
The big disadvantage with this
API is that it's global in scope,
at least global in the app's context.
And this has required careful cleanup on
your part to make sure that the effect
of calling KeyScript with the intent
of affecting input in only one input
context does not spill over into another
input context and affect the user there.
So you had to carefully clean up.
Wouldn't it be nice if the input
context could encapsulate that state?
In particular,
the TSM document associated
with that input context.
So the solution we're providing
are two TSM document properties.
One TSM document property allows
you to specify a subset of all those
input sources enabled by the user,
such as in the international prefs panel.
And by default, any time your input
context gets key focus,
TSM would use the last used
input source from the restricted
list that you have specified.
If you want more fine-grained control,
again, this slide is all about control,
you can yourself specify which input
source specifically from that list
you want to become current when
your input context gets key focus.
Now, there is a desire for minimal
interference of this kind of
restriction with input contexts
that have no restriction.
For example, suppose you're typing away
in Japanese in TextEdit,
and you switch to
another app temporarily,
force is asking only input,
you switch from US to
French and back to TextEdit.
Well, you would expect to continue
to type in Japanese.
So TSM solves this problem by saving
and restoring all the input source
state necessary around any restriction.
Here are some details on the
two properties I mentioned.
We have the new Enable
Input Sources property.
And again, by default,
the behavior in TSM is to select from
that list the last used input source
when your input context gets focused.
If you want more control,
there is the new Input
Source Override property.
Now,
in the lifetime of a given login session,
the user may,
at several different points,
enable and disable various input
sources through the system,
the international press pin.
So you as a developer need to
know from time to time when
to perhaps adjust the subset,
the restricted set of input sources you
specified on various input contexts.
We have a notification that
will allow you to do this.
The KTIS notify enabled
keyboard input sources changed.
It's dispatched through the
CF Distributed Notification Center.
Some examples of the new
document properties in use.
We have the enabled input sources
property in the first box.
The value for this property is simply
a CFArray of TIS input source refs.
If you want that extra level of control,
specify a preferred input source.
We have the input source override
property tag whose value is
simply a TIS input source ref.
Now, one thing I want to point out with
this is that unlike using key script,
which had to be called around the time
that an input context gets key focus,
these properties can be set when
your input context is created,
and then you can forget about them.
Set it, forget it,
let TSM deal with the necessary
synchronization as focus goes from
one input context to the next.
By far the most common use of
restricting input sources is ASCII only.
To that end, we have a convenience API,
TIS Create ASCII Capable
Input Source List,
that gives you back an array of
TIS input sources that are ASCII capable,
take that result,
pass it directly as the value of
the enabled input sources property,
and of course release the result
because it is a Create API.
By far the most common use of
restricting input sources is ASCII only.
To that end, we have a convenience API,
TIS Create ASCII Capable
Input Source List,
that gives you back an array of
TIS input sources that are ASCII capable,
take that result,
pass it directly as the value of
the enabled input sources property,
and of course release the result
because it is a Create API.
The benefit of this is twofold.
One, all key events are pre-translated
by the system before they're
delivered to your input method.
That frees you, the developer,
from having to do your
own keyboard translation.
Another benefit is that since the system
now knows about your override explicitly,
it can show it in system UI,
such as keyboard layout palette.
And this again frees you,
the input method,
from having to implement your
own keyboard layout palettes.
Apple's own Chinese and Korean input
methods have been using this
mechanism since MacOSX 10.4.
And before we go on to the specifics
of this new API I mentioned,
I'd just like to call your
attention briefly to those input
methods that implement input modes,
input mode savvy input methods.
You are currently using TSM select
input mode to switch between
the input modes you implement.
This has been deprecated in favor
of the TIS select input source API,
a very natural correspondence.
There are two lines here in
blue that I really want you
to look for in your code.
If you see these two lines,
please throw them away.
Just look out for them, act aggressively,
and throw them away.
Replace them by the single line,
single API call,
TIS Set Input Method Keyboard
Layout Override.
This will give you all
the benefits I mentioned,
key events pre-translated for free,
and your private keyboard layouts will
be visible in the system keyboard layout,
keyboard viewer palette.
Finally, there is,
if you have a need to find out
what the current override is,
there is a copy function
for that as well.
So, some takeaway points.
Look at the headers, techservices.h,
carbonevents.h,
for all the deprecated API.
Move off of Keyscript, please.
You can do a whole lot more with the
TIS API you could never do before.
Adopt in your applications the
TSM Document Access Protocol.
This will benefit your users,
give them access to a richer set of
services to interact with your documents.
And you'll notice the changes
in the headers on 64-bit,
Carbon events for
resolution independence.
And that's it.
Next, I'd like to hand over
the talk to Lee Collins,
Manager of OS Engineering in Asia.
Thank you.
Thank you, Michael.
As Michael mentioned,
I'm the manager of the team
that does the system software
engineering for our Asian products.
That includes input methods for Chinese,
Korean, and other languages.
Not only do we implement input methods,
but we also are designing new
architectures to support them.
I'll be talking about the Input
Method Kit as one of those today.
So I think this part of the
section will be of particular
interest to those of you,
like my team,
who are developing input methods or are
thinking about developing them for OS X.
I'll be talking about four
things that we're working on
that will be of interest to you.
The big one is the input method kit,
which is basically a new foundation-based
framework for building input methods.
Next, I'll talk to you about how you can
use the keyboard layout overrides that
Michael talked about to enhance your
user experience and to eliminate a lot
of code that you might have in your input
method now for displaying your keyboard
layout and doing keyboard mapping.
I'll talk briefly also about
data-driven input methods,
which are possibly the easiest way
for you to deliver an input method,
depending on how your input method is
structured and what it needs to do,
and finally,
some changes in the way we're going
to package and install input methods.
So what's the Input Method Kit?
You no doubt know that our current
way of building input methods was
designed way back in the early 90s.
It's been obvious to us for many
years that it's very painful
to develop an input method.
We do it all the time.
We have a lot of code that we have
to maintain that is not really
necessary because so much could
be shared across input methods.
The Input Method Kit idea is to make
it simpler both for you and for us to
develop and maintain input methods.
It's a foundation-based API,
and we really think it's
going to be a lot simpler.
So, for example,
if you've tried to look at our sample
code now for building an input method,
it's called the Basic Input Method.
It's component manager-based.
It requires at least 28 source files.
We've reduced that in the
new Input Method Kit sample.
to five source files.
The Input Method Kit has a number
of nice architectural features,
one of which is that the input
methods can now run as applications
in their own address space.
This has some advantages for security,
performance, and robustness.
And in addition,
it has a big advantage for those of
you who have input methods and are
thinking about porting to 64-bit.
Because one of the drawbacks of
the Component Manager-based input
methods is that they run in the same
space as does the client application.
This means that you have to
recompile your input method to
get it to run in a 64-bit client.
With the Input Method Kit,
because the applications run
in their own address space,
you can be running as 32-bit.
Needless to say,
the Input Method Kit is fully integrated
with the TSM so you get all of the
functionality that the TSM offers
and it works with all applications,
Cocoa, and Carbon that support the TSM.
The Input Method Kit is based
around a fairly simple and
natural division of labor.
Basically,
the Kit manages all of the UI and
communications with client apps,
the candidate window, input method modes,
etc.
What you, the developers,
supply are the engine,
the basic conversion engine.
You also indicate how client input should
be treated through key bindings or,
if you really need to go into details,
optional event handling.
[Transcript missing]
So all of these controllers will
share one candidate window object.
Candidate windows are,
if you don't know what
the technology is about,
it's a way to present optional choices
to the user when there's ambiguous input.
The controllers will share the candidate,
create one candidate,
and bring it up whenever they want
to display the options to the user.
The candidate then points
back to the server,
which actually manages
the candidate object.
So the most interesting class to you,
of course,
will be the IMK Input Controller.
This is the hub,
if you want to think about it.
It takes input from
the client application
passes it to the engine and then
passes it back into the application.
This is where you'll
do most of your work.
So when you're thinking about
how you're going to handle
input from client application,
there are three basic approaches
shown here in order of increasing
control but also complexity.
You can choose to use key binding,
in which case you don't look
directly at key codes or the
modifiers attached to the key codes.
You can do this by implementing the
method inputText that only takes a string
in a client and did command by selector.
If you actually need to look at
individual key codes and modifiers,
you take the second approach,
which is to implement input
text that also takes the
modifiers and the key codes.
Finally, if you need to look at an event
in all of its glorious detail,
just implement handleEvents.
Let's talk a little bit
about the candidate window.
Candidate windows are a way of
presenting to the user different
choices when you have ambiguous input.
This is very common in Chinese, Korean,
and Japanese.
For an example, within UniCode,
there are a number of characters that
can be described as a kind of star.
You might want to let your user
input the word "star" and give them
choices for all of the star variants.
To do this,
you would use a candidate window.
When you're using one of the Input
Method Kit candidate windows,
basically you supply the candidates.
The IMK candidates object will handle
selection of the candidate by the user,
let you know which candidates
have been selected,
and all of the other stuff.
For Leopard,
you'll be able to choose up to three
different flavors of window layout.
The grid view shown up here in the top,
a vertical view in the middle,
and finally a horizontal view.
So if you want to use
the candidate window,
this is what you would do.
Inside of your controller class,
you implement two methods.
The first method, candidates,
is basically a way of feeding
the candidates to the window.
The simplest implementation
would just be to pass back an
array of all your candidates.
The second method is Candidate Selected.
This is called whenever
the user has gone through,
looked at the list of candidates
in the candidate window
and decided to choose one.
Something you might do in
Candidate Selected is confirm
the active input area,
maybe update the state of your
input method to rearrange the
frequency with which you display
characters in the candidate window.
Then you create the candidate
object with initWithServer.
You do this with the server
because the server actually,
your IMK,
IMK Server actually is what's going to
manage the candidate window for you.
And then you also pass in the
kind of candidate window you want,
whether you want vertical, horizontal,
or grid.
Then whenever you want to present
the candidates to the user,
you call update and show candidates.
Finally,
remember that your candidate selected
method will be called whenever
A candidate has been chosen,
so make sure that you respond to that
to do whatever you need to update
the state of your input method.
Let's talk a little bit about modes.
Michael and Peter both mentioned modes.
Modes are basically a way
of packaging related input
sources in one input method.
You can think,
I mean a mode is basically,
could be a standalone input method,
but many of the so-called input methods
will actually package sub-input methods.
For example, Japanese contains Hiragana,
Katakana, and Romaji.
Previously, before OS X.3 Panther,
each of our input methods had
very elaborate machinery for
managing these input method modes.
Then we observed that we could
actually simplify this and have
a common way of managing them,
and we came up with this
whole idea of modes,
which we did make public in Panther.
Basically,
it's all driven through data in a plist.
The IMK Kit makes this
even easier for you to use.
To use modes within the kit,
first of all, you just provide
information in the plist,
which we've previously documented
in Tech Note 2128 in the
Component Input Mode Dictionary.
And then the kit will tell you each
time that your mode has been selected
by sending the message "set value."
"Set value" sends a key and a value.
The key in this case would be a key
telling you that your mode has been
selected with the name of the mode.
So respond to this to do whatever
you need to do to switch the mode.
And that's pretty much all you
need to do to add input method
mode support using the IMK Kit.
Let's look at some things you add
to your plist when you're building
an IMK Kit-based input method.
I just mentioned the component mode
dict described in Tech Note 2128.
You do that if you're a
mode-based input method,
and many are.
Input methods are applications,
but they need to run in the background.
So set a key and value LS background
only indicating that they
are background applications.
Now the Kit needs to identify
your controller class,
so there's a key-value pair that
lets you identify that for the Kit.
Input Method Server Controller Class.
This lets the Kit go into your bundle,
find your controller object,
and instantiate it whenever
there needs to be a connection
between the client application
and your Input Method application.
Finally, you need to add a string that
indicates the connection name.
This is how the
IMK Kit talks to your server.
Now let's talk briefly about how
you can improve your input method
using keyboard layout overrides.
The overrides basically let
you associate a keyboard layout
with any input method mode.
The keyboard layouts, of course,
are defined as XML and
then rendered into Uchars,
as was previously discussed.
The beauty of doing it
this way is twofold.
You don't have to have elaborate mapping
tables inside of your input method to
map from virtual keys to the codes that
you take as input in your input method.
Secondly, you don't have to have a
lot of machinery to display
Before we started using
the layout overrides,
all of the Chinese input methods,
for example, had bitmaps of the layouts
and they had key to character
mapping tables built into them.
Once we started using the layouts,
we were able to rip all of that
out and just specify an XML-based
keyboard layout and let the keyboard
viewer do all the drawing for us.
So this is how you would use
the overrides with the IAM Kit.
I previously mentioned that one of
the methods you're going to want
to implement is called setValue.
This will be called whenever
the user selects one of your
modes in the Text Input menu or
using Command Space or however.
In this case,
Set value will contain, as the value,
the name of your mode.
In the example shown here,
we assume that the name of the mode
is the same as the keyboard layout.
It doesn't have to be.
The keyboard layout is going to be stored
inside of your input method bundle.
If you call override
keyboard with keyboard named,
the Input Method Kit will
then go into your bundle,
find the layout,
set it as the current keyboard,
and then you're off and running.
Now let's move briefly to
data-driven input methods.
If your input method can be
described as a very simple mapping
of one string to other strings,
including candidates for
strings that are ambiguous,
then you might want to actually consider
using the data-driven input methods.
It's basically a text
file with mapping rules.
And for Leopard, we plan on using two
semi-standard formats.
One, the .im plugin is the one we've
been using in our Chinese input
methods for a number of releases now.
And .cin is used by an open source
project called Open Vanilla.
These are basically just text
files with very simple mapping.
You supply the text file and register it,
and the system will
handle everything else:
input, a display of your input
method in the text input menu,
candidate window, etc.
Previously,
these kind of data-driven input
methods have been used for a
lot of different languages,
mostly Chinese languages like Cantonese.
You see an example here.
You take the string "DEU6" and map it
to several Chinese candidate characters,
but it could also be used for English.
Take "Happy Face" and generate
all the Unicode characters
that look like a happy face.
So finally,
I'd like to talk briefly about
changes in how we're going to
deliver input methods in Leopard.
Previously, input methods were all based
on the Component Manager,
so they resided in the components
folder in System Library,
etc.
The new input methods are going to be
stored in an input methods folder that
will be supported for three domains:
System, Host, and User.
When you're going to
install an input method,
you can now call a new function
called TISRegisterInputSource that
will register it as you're installing
so you don't have to log out and
log back in for it to take effect.
I think this will be useful for those
of you writing input method installers.
And finally, just a note,
your keyboard layouts need to
be installed in your bundle.
This is actually mostly a
note for internal developers,
but the basic message is if you
don't install them in your bundle,
then you have to do a little bit
more elaborate searching in the
system using the new TIS API to
find your keyboard layouts.
So the easiest thing is just
keep them in the bundle.
Now I'd like to go to a brief demo.
So my team has not only been designing
and developing the Input Method Kit,
But at the same time,
we've been reimplementing all of
our input methods using the kit.
Our philosophy is that if
the kit doesn't work for us,
it's certainly not going to work for you.
It's got to be good enough for
us before we send it to you.
So, as of this point,
we have two of our input methods are
running inside of the Input Method Kit,
Tamil and Korean.
They're both somewhat simpler than
the elaborate Chinese and Japanese,
but those are going underway.
So let's take a look.
I'll also show you the advantage of
using the keyboard layout overrides.
So to see what we're doing,
let's bring up the keyboard viewer.
So you probably-- I hope you're
all familiar with the Keyboard
Viewer and what it does.
Let's see.
Type some English.
You can actually type directly
from the Keyboard Viewer.
Probably not very
useful outside of demos.
Now we pick Korean.
Oops.
Well, let's see.
There is a bug.
It was supposed to update.
And the demo gods were
not going with us today.
Well, let's see.
Let's try that again.
Well, like I said,
I just finished building this last night,
so I'm not going to be
able to demo the overrides,
but let's see if I can demo Korean.
Ah, I got something there.
OK, there.
So now what I've done is I've
specified a keyboard layout
override inside my bundle.
So when I selected one of
those two Korean modes,
the keyboard viewer went in and--
and updated using the keyboard
layout that I specified.
So this has a great advantage so
you can actually see the characters
in the keyboard layout if you're
not familiar with this layout.
This is a Romanized layout,
but not everybody starting to type
Korean may be familiar with it.
So I can type some Korean here.
And this is the Input
Method Kit-based Korean input method.
So all of this is being handled for me.
The only thing I'm really doing is
taking the Hangul input off the keyboard,
converting it internally,
and sending it back to the kit.
And the kit does everything,
all the connection with the document,
et cetera, to update the active area.
And even provides an input method window.
I can select.
Notice that as I select
the different candidates,
they're being updated
inside the document.
That's just a couple lines
of code to do all this.
And that's it.
Okay, so I'd like to end my part of the
session with a few recommendations.
Use the Input Method Kit framework.
We think it's really good.
We're using it.
We encourage you to use it also.
Think about keyboard layout overrides.
We found them very useful in practice.
As I said,
we were able to rip out a lot of
code and just let the keyboard
viewer do a lot of work for us.
And finally,
if your problem is simple enough,
just consider data-driven input methods.
Now for those of you who are willing
to spend a little bit extra effort
and want to have a great opportunity
to sit down with Apple engineers and
bring your code and start working
on porting the Input Method Kit,
your input method to
the Input Method Kit,
we're doing a kitchen in China in
the first week of September.
If you're interested in that,
there are some contacts here.
You can also try contacting me.
I'll be around tomorrow
at the International Lab.
Some more information.
I have to apologize
about the sample code.
The sample code contains
some calls to ICU,
the International Components for UniCode,
which is an open source.
We make wide use of it in the system,
but it's not public.
And it relies on internal headers that
you don't have access to normally.
So if you actually want to get
that sample code to compile,
I suggest that you comment out the
few lines that actually use ICU.
It's not essential to the sample.
It was just there as illustration.
You do that and the
sample should work fine.
Modulo the bugs that are in the README.
There will be a lab tomorrow if
you want to come talk to me more
or other people who are here,
Peter, Michael,
who are here giving the presentation.